So far, we've discussed the even data producers.
In this section, we'll continue our discussion on other data producers,
a bit complex ones.
Many of these are also data consumers and some of these are stand-alone systems.
Foreign robust data strategy,
it is important that we identify all such data sources to
avoid data silos and unnecessary duplication of data.
Using this systems the right way will help us unlock true business value of our data.
OLTP or Online Transaction Processing Systems,
are information systems that typically
facilitate and manage transaction-oriented applications.
To understand what these are,
we need to touch up on acid.
In Wikipedia, acid is defined as a set of properties of database transaction intended to
guarantee validity even in the event of errors, power failures, etc.
We need to break it down further.
As you can see from Wikipedia definition,
atomicity treats a transaction as one unit that either fails or succeeds completely.
Imagine transferring money online,
if only money is removed from your account but does not
add it to intended party's account, that'll be keotic.
Atomicity is ensuring this does not happen and such transactions are treated as a atomic.
As soon as money is removed from your account,
it is added to intended by this account.
Next, consistency.
Consistency makes sure a certain set of rules
are followed on how the transaction happens.
In the above case, you transferred $100,
but first you saw $50 were taken off,
later in the day, you saw another 50 reduced.
This might not be a desirable behavior.
We might want to have some consistency.
The moment you transferred $100,
you saw $100 removed from your account.
This is the expected behavior,
and this is important in the world of online transactions.
Otherwise, it will open floodgates to frauds and financial risk.
Next, isolation.
How transaction integrity is visible to other users and systems is also very important.
In our example while you were transferring $100,
I was transferring $1,000 to your account.
This should be two separate transaction.
It should not appear as one transaction of $900.
Instead, $100 should be taken off from your account in
your transaction and $1,000 from my account to your account in a separate transaction.
Last, durability.
Transaction that have been committed should survive permanently.
In our scenario, let us assume after all the transactions that happen on Jan' 1st,
your account balance was $1,000,
but when you checked on Jan' 20th,
your account had a pending $100 credit.
Since some of the transactions were not registered by system,
this will not be a desirable behavior.
Even after some time,
the transaction should reflect the way they occured.
It should reflect all the transaction we did so far,
and hence a total of $1,000.
OLTP databases are used for such transactions and typically involves inserting,
updating, and deleting small amounts of data in a database.
In order to maintain data integrity,
OLTP databases are asset compliant.
OLTP databases are relational and normalize,
there are source of entity data.
OLTP data can be further fit to analytics engines such as OLAPs.
For most e-commerce sites,
OLTPs, are a must have.
Some examples of transaction that will be registered in OLTP systems are;
when consumer buys an item,
a customer cancels an item,
a customer changes the quantity of an item while it does still to be shipped.
OLAP, or Online Analytical Processing Systems,
a software that help users analyze data from
different databases across multiple dimensions.
Dimensions such as time or region.
OLAP System consists of
OLAP data warehouses that usually combine data from many different sources in a company.
OLAP server is used to run complex and sophisticated queries.
The standard application of OLAP are;
business intelligence, data writing and reporting through data mining processes.
Tables and OLAP systems are not normalized
and OLAP data systems are not strictly relational.
First, we look at some numbers for Amazon,
4,000 items are sold per minute from 12 million products to choose from.
More than a 103 million buyers use this platform,
and more than 2.5 million sellers sell on Amazon.
These numbers give us a good idea of the volume.
Now, imagine Amazon analysts sifting through this data to generate reports for
all sellers with details of how many units were sold
in Jan' verses Feb' and also otherwise,
how many units were sold in Washington versus California?
It might take them years if they do not have systems like
OLAP that aggregate data across multiple dimensions,
such as time and all regions,
resulting in reduced runtime for such complex queries.
Similarly, marketing might be analyzing bestsellers, monthly or annually.
To get this data,
a query will have to be run through millions of
transaction and might have to join multiple tables.
Again, super time consuming and inefficient.
OLAP cubes will help get such answers way quicker.
Bottom line, OLAP systems will make reporting and data easy.